doc/PEP.adoc, before:

= Package Ecosystem Plan
:copyright: Copyright 2018 Rene Rivera
:author: Rene Rivera
:email: grafikrobot@gmail.com
:docnumber: D1177
:revnumber: {docnumber}R0
:revdate: {docdate}
:revremark: Initial
:version-label!: 
:reproducible:
:nofooter:
:sectanchors:
:sectnums:
:source-highlighter: highlightjs
:source-language: c++
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3
:caution-caption: ⚑
:important-caption: ‼
:note-caption: ℹ
:tip-caption: ☀
:warning-caption: ⚠
:CPP: C++
:PP: ++
:P: +

ifdef::backend-html5[]
++++
<style>
include::std.css[]
</style>
++++
endif::[]

[horizontal]
Document number:: ISO/IEC/JTC1/SC22/WG21/{revnumber}
Date:: {revdate}
Reply-to:: {author}, {email}
Audience:: Tooling (SG15)

== Abstract

A plan for a cohesive ecosystem of package production and consumption among
all {CPP} tools.

== Introduction

We've reached a point in {CPP} where our success has trapped us in a conundrum.
The {CPP} Language and the standard library is a popular and high quality
platform upon which to program for many domains. As such it is a popular
vehicle for extensions for narrower and narrower domains. Which brings the
unfortunate problem of making the management of those additions take more and
more effort. The well known solution to this problem is to adopt package and
dependency management as an extension to the built-in platform capabilities.
Unfortunately for {CPP} the package and dependency management solutions to date
are not interoperable nor interchangeable and hence cause confusion for users.
As not only do they have to choose a compiler and environment, but now they
also get to choose a package manager.

This paper intends to define a general structure of a
package ecosystem wherein users can expect to consume and produce
libraries with whatever {CPP} tools they choose in an interchangeable
manner.

This paper *does not* propose to create a single standard build system,
dependency manager, package manager, nor packages.

== Definitions

Some of the terms used herein have historically varied meanings. In this paper
here are what we intend when we refer to the terms.

Library::
The group of code, compiled or as source, that you use directly. For
example: libz, Boost MP11, and QtCore.

Package::
An object that defines, and possibly implements, everything a user needs
to use a library in your project. It can be a combination of some or all of:
source for a library, pre-built binaries for a library, instructions for
building the library, instructions for downloading binaries, enumeration of
dependencies of the library.

Dependency Manager::
Controls how the use of libraries in your project correlates to
corresponding packages that provide those libraries to you project and how to
arrange those packages libraries to make them usable by your project.

Package Manager::
Takes references to packages your project wants and delivers them such that
the dependency manager can instruct your project to use those packages. This
can include downloading from a non-local resource and building for the use
case of your project.

Package and Dependency Manager::
It is common, because of the close dependence between them, to combine both
the dependency manager and the package manager. In this paper this is the
form which we consider as it simplifies the discussion and is the form
generally found in the wild.

== Current Landscape

At this time we have three key components to our package ecosystem:

* Compiler
* Build System
* Package and Dependency Manager (PDM), and related packages

Below is a simplified view of the data flow between those components. As
depending on the build system and PDM they may use additional data
including source files.

[ditaa,pep-present,svg,shadows="false"]
....
                            +------------+
                            |            |
                    /-----<-+  Compiler  +-<----\
                    |       |            |      |
                    |       +------------+      |
                /---+----\                  /---+----\      /--------\
                |  bins  |                  |  cmd   +-*----+  srcs  |
                \---+----/                  \---+----/      \--------/
                    |       +------------+      |
                    |       |            |      |
                    \----->-+    Build   +->----/
                    /-----<-+   System   +-<----\
                    |       |            |      |
                    |       +------------+      |
                /---+----\                  /---+----\
                |   ?    |                  |   ?    |
                \---+----/                  \---+----/
                    |       +------------+      |
                    |       |            |      |
                    \----->-+   P.D.M.   +->----/
                            |            |
                            |            |
                            +------------+
....

[ditaa,pep-a,svg,shadows="false",separation="false"]
....
+---------------+-----------+---------------+-----------+
|Data           | /--\      |Process        | +--+      |
|               | |  |      |               | |  |      |
|               | \--/      |               | +--+      |
+---------------+-----------+---------------+-----------+
|X Produces Y   | X ->-- Y  |X Uses Y       | X -*-- Y  |
|Y Accepts X    |           |               |           |
+---------------+-----------+---------------+-----------+
....

== The Future

=== Package Index

One key problem with the current situation is that users consume packages
from a restricted universe. When you decide to use PDM _A_ you also decide
to use the packages available *only* from _A_. Hence if there is a package
_P_ only available from PDM _B_ you are back to some uncomfortable choices
for your development.

That is not the only problem; There is also the issue that discovering what
packages, from which PDMs, would involve going through each PDM and searching
for what they have.

To resolve these we see the need for a global "Package Index". The index would
contain data for each library in the C++ ecosystem. It would contain
canonical information for each library such as: available packages (and the
PDM of each), library name, description, license, and so on. What it would
not contain would be the packages themselves. Having this would allow users
to determine quickly where to get the one library they are interested in,
hopefully with minimal effort.

[ditaa,pep-pindex,svg,shadows="false"]
....
                            +------------+
                            |            |
                    /-----<-+  Compiler  +-<----\
                    |       |            |      |
                    |       +------------+      |
                /---+----\                  /---+----\      /--------\
                |  bins  |                  |  cmd   +-*----+  srcs  |
                \---+----/                  \---+----/      \--------/
                    |       +------------+      |
                    |       |            |      |
                    \----->-+    Build   +->----/
                    /-----<-+   System   +-<----\
                    |       |            |      |
                    |       +------------+      |
                /---+----\                  /---+----\
                |   ?    |                  |   ?    |
                \---+----/                  \---+----/
                    |       +------------+      |
                    |       |            |      |
                    \----->-+   P.D.M.   +->----/
                    /-----<-+            +-<----\
                    |       |            |      |
                    |       +------------+      |
                /---+----\                  /---+----\
                |   ?    |                  |   ?    |
                \---+----/                  \---+----/
                    |       +------------+      |
                    |       |            |      |
                    \----->-+   Package  +->----/
                            |   Index    |
                            |            |
                            +------------+
....

=== Interfaces

There is one glaring problem with the above future structure: Users are now
not only dealing with how to interact with multiple compilers and build
systems, but now would also have to deal with multiple PDMs. Thankfully,
they might be spared having to deal with multiple package indices. We need
to create standard interfaces to all our tools such that we gain the
varied benefits from the common understanding they bring. What does it mean
to create such standard interfaces? In terms of packages it means defining
standards for:

* Invoking compilers
* Compiler responses
* Build system consumption and production of packages
* Communicating with a Package Index

We need to define all the data flow connections in our ecosystem in a
standard and interchangeable manner:

[ditaa,pep-interfaces,svg,shadows="false"]
....
/-------------------------------------=--------------------------------------\
|                               +------------+                               |
|                               |            |                               |
|                       /-----<-+  Compiler  +-<----\                        |
|                       |       |            |      |           /--------\   |
|                       |       +------------+      |        /--+ sopts  |   |
|                   /---+----\                  /---+----\   |  \--------/   |
|                   |  bins  |                  |  cmd   +-*-+               |
|                   \---+----/                  \---+----/   |  /--------\   |
|                       |                           |        \--+  srcs  |   |
|                       |                           |           \--------/   |
|                       |                           |                        |
|Compiler API           |                           |                        |
\---------------------=-|-------------=-------------|-=----------------------/
                        |                           |
/---------------------=-|-------------=-------------|-=----------------------\
|Build System API       |                           |                        |
|                       |                           |                        |
|                       |       +------------+      |                        |
|                       |       |            |      |                        |
|                       \----->-+    Build   +->----/                        |
|                       /-----<-+   System   +-<----\                        |
|                       |       |            |      |                        |
|                       |       +------------+      |                        |
\---------------------=-|-------------=-------------|-=----------------------/
                        |                           |
/---------------------=-|-------------=-------------|-=----------------------\
|PDM API                |                           |                        |
|                       |                           |                        |
|   /--------\          |                           |                        |
|   | sopts  +--\       |                           |                        |
|   \--------/  |   /---+----\                  /---+----\      /--------\   |
|               +-*-+  pdep  |                  | pdesc  +-*----+ sopts  |   |
|   /--------\  |   \---+----/                  \---+----/      \--------/   |
|   |  UPID  +--/       |                           |                        |
|   \--------/          |                           |                        |
|                       |       +------------+      |                        |
|                       |       |            |      |                        |
|                       \----->-+   P.D.M.   +->----/                        |
|                       /-----<-+            +-<----\                        |
|                       |       |            |      |                        |
|                       |       +------------+      |                        |
\---------------------=-|-------------=-------------|-=----------------------/
                        |                           |
/---------------------=-|-------------=-------------|-=----------------------\
|Package Index API      |                           |                        |
|                       |                           |                        |
|   /--------\          |                           |                        |
|   | sopts  +--\       |                           |                        |
|   \--------/  |   /---+----\                  /---+----\                   |
|               +-*-+ pquery |                  | plist  |                   |
|   /--------\  |   \---+----/                  \---+----/                   |
|   |  UPID  +--/       |                           |                        |
|   \--------/          |                           |                        |
|                       |       +------------+      |                        |
|                       |       |            |      |                        |
|                       \----->-+   Package  +->----/                        |
|                               |   Index    |                               |
|                               |            |                               |
|                               +------------+                               |
\-------------------------------------=--------------------------------------/
....

In the diagram the following are used as shorthands:

[horizontal]
`bins`:: General output from compilers, might not be just binaries
`cmd`:: Compiler commands
`srcs`:: Language source we feed our tools with
`sopts`:: Standard Options
`pdep`:: Package Dependency
`pdesc`:: Package Description
`UPID`:: Universal Package Identifier
`pquery`:: Package Query
`plist`:: Package List

== Plan

Note that this is a simplified view of the breadth of what such interfaces would
need to specify. It is limited to the minimal interactions for using packages.
Proposals for the individual components would be sufficiently detailed to handle
the varied use cases of the tools ecosystem as a whole.

=== Compiler API

_Goal_:: Define standard interfaces to control and communicate with compilers
to produce data required for build systems, PDMs, source editors, and so on.

Given that compilers are at the core of our data needs we would expect this API
to expand over time to address the various needs of the tools that need it.

==== Standard Options

Currently build tools, and users, need to deal with a differing set of APIs
to communicate with compilers. This makes it difficult to define consistent
build descriptions not just in the build system but throught any tooling
that needs reproducible builds.

In an ideal ecosystem all compilers would use a well known single options API
that the whole ecosystem would use to interoperate between different
compilers, build systems, PDMs, and other tools.

The link:https://rawgit.com/bfgroup/std_cpp/master/doc/std_compile_D1178R0.html[`std::compile`]
proposal (D1177R0) covers this topic.

=== Build System API

_Goal_:: Define minimal standard interface to build and define software
build requirements.

=== PDM API

_Goal_:: Define standard interfaces to control and communicate with PDMs to
both consume and produce packages.

==== Package Dependency

Currently when using a PDM one uses a package reference particular to that
PDM to indicate your dependency on a package. This makes using different
PDMs difficult. It means that if you ever want to share your project
with someone who uses a different PDM they need to rewrite all those
package references, assuming equivalents even exist in that other PDM.

We need to define a single syntax to describe the packages we depend on.
Having that would allow build systems to use PDMs interchangeably openning the
entire collection of packages to users.

==== Packages Description

Like with the package dependency, we currently use different ways of describing
the packages we need for any particular build of our software depending on the
PDM we are using. We can't write a tool, like a build system, to communicate
with PDMs one time. And like compilers we end up needing to write synthetic
interfaces to each PDM on every tool.

Like having the common standard options, having common package description
among PDMs allows us to write interchangeable tools on top of such an API.
This API would combine the standard options and a package dependency to ask
PDMs for the specific build variation we need to use. What happens behind
the scenes to get you a package that matches your requirements is, as we are
fond of saying, _implementation defined_. This API would: allow tool makers to
"write once" to use PDMs, allow users to migrate from one PDM to another,
it could even allow use of multiple PDMs simultaneously if such a need arrises.

==== Universal Package Identifier

To be able to support interchangeability between different PDMs we can't be
tied to their individual package references. We need a single universal package
identifier (UPID) to use in our projects that can refer to the components.

=== Package Index API

_Goal_:: Define standard interfaces to query and publish package records for
PDMs, and users.

==== Package Query

Having a package index is no good without a consistent way of asking for
packages. A standard package query that tools can use to interrogate
available packeges is just one of the many interface points we need in an
index.

==== Package List

At minimum a package index needs to respond to queries with the set of
packages available. The package list defines a standard response to that
query.

=== Package Index Authority

_Goal_:: Create a process for assigning a single authoritative source of
package index information.

There is a key question that arises from having a package index.. Should we
have one or many such indices? There are pros and cons for such a choice but
there is one overwhelming concern.. Having multiple indices causes
fragmentation and confusion for users. Assuming that there will be
multiple parties interested in providing the index service we need to
define who will be the authoritative source of this data. Hence we need to
define a process that includes selection criteria, review, and official
designation of who is the universal package index authority.

== Acknowledgements

Thanks to CppCon 2017 for providing the environment for "arguments" about
build systems, package managers, and dependency managers that created the
impetus for this idea.

Commit message:

Minor syntax corrections, and acknowledge slack feedback.

doc/PEP.adoc, after:

= Package Ecosystem Plan
:copyright: Copyright 2018 Rene Rivera
:author: Rene Rivera
:email: grafikrobot@gmail.com
:docnumber: D1177
:revnumber: {docnumber}R0
:revdate: {docdate}
:revremark: Initial
:version-label!: 
:reproducible:
:nofooter:
:sectanchors:
:sectnums:
:source-highlighter: highlightjs
:source-language: c++
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3
:caution-caption: ⚑
:important-caption: ‼
:note-caption: ℹ
:tip-caption: ☀
:warning-caption: ⚠
:CPP: C++
:PP: ++
:P: +

ifdef::backend-html5[]
++++
<style>
include::std.css[]
</style>
++++
endif::[]

[horizontal]
Document number:: ISO/IEC/JTC1/SC22/WG21/{revnumber}
Date:: {revdate}
Reply-to:: {author}, {email}
Audience:: Tooling (SG15)

== Abstract

A plan for a cohesive ecosystem of package production and consumption among
all {CPP} tools.

== Introduction

We've reached a point in {CPP} where our success has trapped us in a conundrum.
The {CPP} Language and the standard library is a popular and high quality
platform upon which to program for many domains. As such it is a popular
vehicle for extensions for narrower and narrower domains. Which brings the
unfortunate problem of making the management of those additions take more and
more effort. The well known solution to this problem is to adopt package and
dependency management as an extension to the built-in platform capabilities.
Unfortunately for {CPP} the package and dependency management solutions to date
are not interoperable nor interchangeable and hence cause confusion for users.
As not only do they have to choose a compiler and environment, but now they
also get to choose a package manager.

This paper intends to define a general structure of a
package ecosystem wherein users can expect to consume and produce
libraries with whatever {CPP} tools they choose in an interchangeable
manner.

This paper *does not* propose to create a single standard build system,
dependency manager, package manager, nor packages.

== Definitions

Some of the terms used herein have historically varied meanings. In this paper
here are what we intend when we refer to the terms.

Library::
The group of code, compiled or as source, that you use directly. For
example: libz, Boost MP11, and QtCore.

Package::
An object that defines, and possibly implements, everything a user needs
to use a library in your project. It can be a combination of some or all of:
source for a library, pre-built binaries for a library, instructions for
building the library, instructions for downloading binaries, enumeration of
dependencies of the library.

Dependency Manager::
Controls how the use of libraries in your project correlates to
corresponding packages that provide those libraries to you project and how to
arrange those package libraries to make them usable by your project.

Package Manager::
Takes references to packages your project wants and delivers them such that
the dependency manager can instruct your project to use those packages. This
can include downloading from a non-local resource and building for the use
case of your project.

Package and Dependency Manager::
It is common, because of the close dependence between them, to combine both
the dependency manager and the package manager. In this paper this is the
form which we consider as it simplifies the discussion and is the form
generally found in the wild.

== Current Landscape

At this time we have three key components to our package ecosystem:

* Compiler
* Build System
* Package and Dependency Manager (PDM), and related packages

Below is a simplified view of the data flow between those components. As
depending on the build system and PDM they may use additional data
including source files.

[ditaa,pep-present,svg,shadows="false"]
....
                            +------------+
                            |            |
                    /-----<-+  Compiler  +-<----\
                    |       |            |      |
                    |       +------------+      |
                /---+----\                  /---+----\      /--------\
                |  bins  |                  |  cmd   +-*----+  srcs  |
                \---+----/                  \---+----/      \--------/
                    |       +------------+      |
                    |       |            |      |
                    \----->-+    Build   +->----/
                    /-----<-+   System   +-<----\
                    |       |            |      |
                    |       +------------+      |
                /---+----\                  /---+----\
                |   ?    |                  |   ?    |
                \---+----/                  \---+----/
                    |       +------------+      |
                    |       |            |      |
                    \----->-+   P.D.M.   +->----/
                            |            |
                            |            |
                            +------------+
....

[ditaa,pep-a,svg,shadows="false",separation="false"]
....
+---------------+-----------+---------------+-----------+
|Data           | /--\      |Process        | +--+      |
|               | |  |      |               | |  |      |
|               | \--/      |               | +--+      |
+---------------+-----------+---------------+-----------+
|X Produces Y   | X ->-- Y  |X Uses Y       | X -*-- Y  |
|Y Accepts X    |           |               |           |
+---------------+-----------+---------------+-----------+
....

== The Future

=== Package Index

One key problem with the current situation is that users consume packages
from a restricted universe. When you decide to use PDM _A_ you also decide
to use the packages available *only* from _A_. Hence if there is a package
_P_ only available from PDM _B_ you are back to some uncomfortable choices
for your development.

That is not the only problem; There is also the issue that discovering what
packages, from which PDMs, would involve going through each PDM and searching
for what they have.

To resolve these we see the need for a global "Package Index". The index would
contain data for each library in the C++ ecosystem. It would contain
canonical information for each library such as: available packages (and the
PDM of each), library name, description, license, and so on. What it would
not contain would be the packages themselves. Having this would allow users
to determine quickly where to get the one library they are interested in,
hopefully with minimal effort.

[ditaa,pep-pindex,svg,shadows="false"]
....
                            +------------+
                            |            |
                    /-----<-+  Compiler  +-<----\
                    |       |            |      |
                    |       +------------+      |
                /---+----\                  /---+----\      /--------\
                |  bins  |                  |  cmd   +-*----+  srcs  |
                \---+----/                  \---+----/      \--------/
                    |       +------------+      |
                    |       |            |      |
                    \----->-+    Build   +->----/
                    /-----<-+   System   +-<----\
                    |       |            |      |
                    |       +------------+      |
                /---+----\                  /---+----\
                |   ?    |                  |   ?    |
                \---+----/                  \---+----/
                    |       +------------+      |
                    |       |            |      |
                    \----->-+   P.D.M.   +->----/
                    /-----<-+            +-<----\
                    |       |            |      |
                    |       +------------+      |
                /---+----\                  /---+----\
                |   ?    |                  |   ?    |
                \---+----/                  \---+----/
                    |       +------------+      |
                    |       |            |      |
                    \----->-+   Package  +->----/
                            |   Index    |
                            |            |
                            +------------+
....

=== Interfaces

There is one glaring problem with the above future structure: Users are now
not only dealing with how to interact with multiple compilers and build
systems, but now would also have to deal with multiple PDMs. Thankfully,
they might be spared having to deal with multiple package indices. We need
to create standard interfaces to all our tools such that we gain the
varied benefits from the common understanding they bring. What does it mean
to create such standard interfaces? In terms of packages it means defining
standards for:

* Invoking compilers
* Compiler responses
* Build system consumption and production of packages
* Communicating with a Package Index

We need to define all the data flow connections in our ecosystem in a
standard and interchangeable manner:

[ditaa,pep-interfaces,svg,shadows="false"]
....
/-------------------------------------=--------------------------------------\
|                               +------------+                               |
|                               |            |                               |
|                       /-----<-+  Compiler  +-<----\                        |
|                       |       |            |      |           /--------\   |
|                       |       +------------+      |        /--+ sopts  |   |
|                   /---+----\                  /---+----\   |  \--------/   |
|                   |  bins  |                  |  cmd   +-*-+               |
|                   \---+----/                  \---+----/   |  /--------\   |
|                       |                           |        \--+  srcs  |   |
|                       |                           |           \--------/   |
|                       |                           |                        |
|Compiler API           |                           |                        |
\---------------------=-|-------------=-------------|-=----------------------/
                        |                           |
/---------------------=-|-------------=-------------|-=----------------------\
|Build System API       |                           |                        |
|                       |                           |                        |
|                       |       +------------+      |                        |
|                       |       |            |      |                        |
|                       \----->-+    Build   +->----/                        |
|                       /-----<-+   System   +-<----\                        |
|                       |       |            |      |                        |
|                       |       +------------+      |                        |
\---------------------=-|-------------=-------------|-=----------------------/
                        |                           |
/---------------------=-|-------------=-------------|-=----------------------\
|PDM API                |                           |                        |
|                       |                           |                        |
|   /--------\          |                           |                        |
|   | sopts  +--\       |                           |                        |
|   \--------/  |   /---+----\                  /---+----\      /--------\   |
|               +-*-+  pdep  |                  | pdesc  +-*----+ sopts  |   |
|   /--------\  |   \---+----/                  \---+----/      \--------/   |
|   |  UPID  +--/       |                           |                        |
|   \--------/          |                           |                        |
|                       |       +------------+      |                        |
|                       |       |            |      |                        |
|                       \----->-+   P.D.M.   +->----/                        |
|                       /-----<-+            +-<----\                        |
|                       |       |            |      |                        |
|                       |       +------------+      |                        |
\---------------------=-|-------------=-------------|-=----------------------/
                        |                           |
/---------------------=-|-------------=-------------|-=----------------------\
|Package Index API      |                           |                        |
|                       |                           |                        |
|   /--------\          |                           |                        |
|   | sopts  +--\       |                           |                        |
|   \--------/  |   /---+----\                  /---+----\                   |
|               +-*-+ pquery |                  | plist  |                   |
|   /--------\  |   \---+----/                  \---+----/                   |
|   |  UPID  +--/       |                           |                        |
|   \--------/          |                           |                        |
|                       |       +------------+      |                        |
|                       |       |            |      |                        |
|                       \----->-+   Package  +->----/                        |
|                               |   Index    |                               |
|                               |            |                               |
|                               +------------+                               |
\-------------------------------------=--------------------------------------/
....

In the diagram the following are used as shorthands:

[horizontal]
`bins`:: General output from compilers, might not be just binaries
`cmd`:: Compiler commands
`srcs`:: Language source we feed our tools with
`sopts`:: Standard Options
`pdep`:: Package Dependency
`pdesc`:: Package Description
`UPID`:: Universal Package Identifier
`pquery`:: Package Query
`plist`:: Package List

== Plan

Note that this is a simplified view of the breadth of what such interfaces would
need to specify. It is limited to the minimal interactions for using packages.
Proposals for the individual components would be sufficiently detailed to handle
the varied use cases of the tools ecosystem as a whole.

=== Compiler API

_Goal_:: Define standard interfaces to control and communicate with compilers
to produce data required for build systems, PDMs, source editors, and so on.

Given that compilers are at the core of our data needs we would expect this API
to expand over time to address the various needs of the tools that need it.

==== Standard Options

Currently build tools, and users, need to deal with a differing set of APIs
to communicate with compilers. This makes it difficult to define consistent
build descriptions not just in the build system but throught any tooling
that needs reproducible builds.

In an ideal ecosystem all compilers would use a well known single options API
that the whole ecosystem would use to interoperate between different
compilers, build systems, PDMs, and other tools.

The link:https://rawgit.com/bfgroup/std_cpp/master/doc/std_compile_D1178R0.html[`std::compile`]
proposal (D1178R0) covers this topic.

=== Build System API

_Goal_:: Define minimal standard interface to build and define software
build requirements.

=== PDM API

_Goal_:: Define standard interfaces to control and communicate with PDMs to
both consume and produce packages.

==== Package Dependency

Currently when using a PDM one uses a package reference particular to that
PDM to indicate your dependency on a package. This makes using different
PDMs difficult. It means that if you ever want to share your project
with someone who uses a different PDM they need to rewrite all those
package references, assuming equivalents even exist in that other PDM.

We need to define a single syntax to describe the packages we depend on.
Having that would allow build systems to use PDMs interchangeably openning the
entire collection of packages to users.

==== Packages Description

Like with the package dependency, we currently use different ways of describing
the packages we need for any particular build of our software depending on the
PDM we are using. We can't write a tool, like a build system, to communicate
with PDMs one time. And like compilers we end up needing to write synthetic
interfaces to each PDM on every tool.

Like having the common standard options, having common package description
among PDMs allows us to write interchangeable tools on top of such an API.
This API would combine the standard options and a package dependency to ask
PDMs for the specific build variation we need to use. What happens behind
the scenes to get you a package that matches your requirements is, as we are
fond of saying, _implementation defined_. This API would: allow tool makers to
"write once" to use PDMs, allow users to migrate from one PDM to another,
it could even allow use of multiple PDMs simultaneously if such a need arrises.

==== Universal Package Identifier

To be able to support interchangeability between different PDMs we can't be
tied to their individual package references. We need a single universal package
identifier (UPID) to use in our projects that can refer to the components.

=== Package Index API

_Goal_:: Define standard interfaces to query and publish package records for
PDMs, and users.

==== Package Query

Having a package index is no good without a consistent way of asking for
packages. A standard package query that tools can use to interrogate
available packeges is just one of the many interface points we need in an
index.

==== Package List

At minimum a package index needs to respond to queries with the set of
packages available. The package list defines a standard response to that
query.

=== Package Index Authority

_Goal_:: Create a process for assigning a single authoritative source of
package index information.

There is a key question that arises from having a package index.. Should we
have one or many such indices? There are pros and cons for such a choice but
there is one overwhelming concern.. Having multiple indices causes
fragmentation and confusion for users. Assuming that there will be
multiple parties interested in providing the index service we need to
define who will be the authoritative source of this data. Hence we need to
define a process that includes selection criteria, review, and official
designation of who is the universal package index authority.

== Acknowledgements

Thanks to CppCon 2017 for providing the environment for "arguments" about
build systems, package managers, and dependency managers that created the
impetus for this idea.

Thanks to Breno Rodrigues Guimarães, Steve Downey, and others in the CppLang
Slack community who provided feedback to the draft version of this document.
